I think one of the things that really
has, I guess,
driven, I guess, the US to to do to
seize Venezuela in some ways is is the
fact that we have seen China
and and and its influence into Latin
America and the Western Hemisphere.
Do you see China in any way react you
know, responding in a big way to to what
we've seen in the last few days?
Um in terms of
commitment beyond verbal condemnation, I
don't see more of a comeback from China.
It has been quite conservative when it
comes to more investment commitment or
military commitments in the Latin
American region, especially when it
comes to Venezuela. It represents one of
those sunk cost relationship that China
has committed long time ago to investing
infrastructure. But when it comes to
political influence during the years,
under the US pressure, China has made
very little inroads.
Okay. Well, the it could be it could
well be Let me just rephrase it. It
could well be a sunk cost
specifically on Venezuela.
Let me just use an accounting concept.
It still is an ongoing concern as it
pertains to China's influence in Latin
America. How does it change that broader
strategy then?
Well, China's Latin American strategy is
a quite important node of its Belt and
Road Initiative. But in the past a
decade, we can see that the public
financed projects has been steadily
declining. But the private interest
remains. We have seen a lot of Chinese
companies investing in Latin America.
So, if we're talking about influence of
sphere of the economic perspective,
China has pretty high impact on the
region. But politically, militarily, or
in other initiatives, China's really
lagging behind. But one positive
improvement I've seen significantly in
the past few years is in terms of the
monetary cooperation. And in last
December, President Xi Jinping came out
to talk about its Latin America strategy
in its policy paper. And there at the
center of it, it's about deepening the
financial collaboration and the military
collaboration uh monetary collaboration.
And that means China's RMB
internationalization in Latin America
will deepen. And the trade settlement uh
will have more of a uh market,
especially when when it comes to
countries under sanctions from the US.
Yeah, when you talk about these spheres
of influence, right? This quote-unquote
Don Roe doctrine that the president has
has named it of of the US has the you
know, the authority to assert control
over Latin America
uh and to actually reject other outside
countries from getting involved.
What do you think that China How does
China looks at that right now? I mean,
does does that give any sort of
move for China to to claim East Asia,
for example? The implications for
Taiwan, do you think that there are any
or are they not valid?
Um the Latin America is not really a
playbook for China's strategy on Taiwan.
And China is quite pragmatic when it
comes to this sphere of influence
concept. If similar situation like
Venezuela operation happened in Asia,
China would have responded way more
forcefully than what it did after this
incident. Um we have to acknowledge that
the cost of control, economically or
politically,
increase exponentially with distance.
And South America cannot be further from
China anywhere on Earth. But for Asian
region, it is really the sphere of
influence for China, even if we don't
fully agree with the whole concept.
China has more of economic impact rather
than political impact for any of those
countries. But nonetheless,
the political and economical coercion is
more likely when it comes to Taiwan. And
we can see that
the China hawks
after the Venezuela operation has toned
down significantly as well. Because the
popular narrative before was that the
East is rising, the West is declining.
But now it seems that all of a sudden
people all realize that America has the
military might to just deter whatever
China wants to do to Taiwan if they
really want to.
Yeah, but hasn't China taken advantage
of this opportunity to
Well, largely and we've had an interview
this week that talks about that to
discredit the United States for at least
in this specific case, it's disregard
for sovereignty.
Uh the international law certainly is
not binding for big powers like the US.
So, China could take advantage of that.
But when it comes to practical measures
against Taiwan, it probably will be more
realistic for China to use economic
coercion, more of a sanction for
Taiwanese companies, or more
restrictions on the shipping routes. But
for military attack, it is very much a
last resort decision.
Because if China really decide to do
this, it has to make sure that it's a
quick, decisive win. It has to make sure
that it doesn't turn into this wicked
situation like Gaza or a prolonged war
like Ukraine and Russia. Because after
that, the perceived military
military credibility of China will be
badly damaged if it's not really a quick
win.
Just a theoretical exercise. Let's
assume for a moment that this did not
happen, Venezuela this year. Does it in
any way affect How does it change, if
any at all, China's foreign policy
priorities this year? And what would
those be agnostic of whether or not this
thing happened or not?
Well, we just published our top risks
for the year. Actually, the China-US
relation and the Taiwan issue are not
among the top risks. They're just red
herrings. And China will do everything
in their power to make sure that this
year the China-US relation will have the
stable environment, especially before
the April Trump visit to China. And also
later in the year, Xi will President Xi
will reciprocate and visit Washington.
So, this is a quite a diplomatic year.
And for China, the priority is really to
take this time as a breathing room to
fix some of the domestic
vulnerabilities. And domestic economy is
certainly one of them. But mostly, it's
about the neighbor the neighborhood
environment. China has been engaging
quite heavily with its neighbors, the
ASEAN countries.
Korean development we can see is quite
positive. The bilateral relation with
Japan has been very
risky stage. And there is no way that
China is going to backing out to back
out in this current position. So, it has
to engage as much as possible with the
rest of Asia.